# Lab Answer Key:  Module 4: Virtual Machines 
## Lab 1: Creating a Linux Virtual Machine

Please note that the virtual machine that you will create in this lab will also
be used in the next lab of this course.

Lab exercises:

1. Create cryptographic keys
1. Create and connect to a Linux virtual machine

### Exercise 1: Create cryptographic keys

- [Windows Instructions](#windows-instructions)
- [Linux/Mac Instructions](#linux-mac-instructions)

Scenario: In this exercise you will create cryptographic keys that you will use
to connect via PuTTY to the Azure virtual machine that you deploy later in this
lab.

#### Windows Instructions

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Install Git for Windows
1. Create a key pair
1. Create a private key for PuTTY

##### Task 1: Install Git for Windows

1. Using a web browser, navigate to https://git-for-windows.github.io/

1. Click on the **Download** link.

1. When prompted whether to run or save the Git executable, click **Run**.

1. In the Git 2.11.0 Setup wizard, accept the default settings to complete the install.

1. Once the install completes, on the **Completing the Git Setup Wizard** page,
   select the **Launch Git Bash** checkbox and click **Finish**. Alternatively,
   from the Start menu (or screen), start **Git Bash**.

##### Task 2: Create a key pair

1. In the **Git Bash window**, run the following:

    ```bash
    openssl.exe req -x509 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 \
      -keyout myPrivateKey.key -out myCert.pem
    ```

1. When prompted, provide the information to be incorporated into the
   certificate you are generating, including country code, state or province,
   locality name, organization name, organizational unit, common name, and
   email address (for the purpose of this lab, you can use made up values).

1. Generate a public key by running:

    ```bash
    openssl.exe rsa -pubout -in myPrivateKey.key -out myPublicKey.key
    ```

##### Task 3: Create a private key for PuTTY

1. Convert the private key you generated in the previous task into a private
   key that you will be able to use with the PuTTY utility. In the **Git Bash**
   window, run the following:

    ```bash
    openssl rsa -in ./myPrivateKey.key -out myPrivateKey_rsa
    ```

1. Using a web browser navigate to the [PuTTY Website][].

1. Download `puttygen.exe` to the `C:\Users\<username>` folder, where
   `<username>` is your Windows user account name. This is the same location
   where the keys you generated in the previous task reside.

1. In the File Explorer window, double-click `puttygen.exe`.

1. In the **PuTTY Key Generator** window, click **Load**.

1. In the **Load private key** dialog box, make sure that the current directory
   is `C:\Users\<username>`, where `<username>` is the name of your user account,
   change filter to **All Files (*.*)**, select **myPrivateKey_rsa** and click
   **Open**.

1. In the **PuTTYgen Notice** dialog box, click **OK**.

1. Copy the entire content of the **Public key for pasting into OpenSSH
   authorized_keys file** section of the **PuTTY Key Generator** window into
   Clipboard.

1. In the **PuTTY Key Generator** window, click **Save private key**

1. Save the private key as `myPrivateKey_rsa.ppk` in the `C:\Users\<username>`
   directory (where `<username>`is your Windows user name). Click **Yes** in
   the **PuTTYgen Warning** dialog box, when prompted whether to save the key
   without a passphrase to protect it. Note that you have the option of
   protecting it with a passphrase.
    >*Note: Outside of a lab environment, you should use a passphrase and file
    >system permission to protect your private key.*

#### Mac/Linux Instructions

##### Task 1: Verify openSSL is installed

    This is an incomplete list. Some commands may require sudo.

    If the output of `which openssl; echo $?` is `1`, then openssl is not
    installed.

    * Mac: `brew install openssl`
    * Ubuntu: `apt install openssl`
    * RedHat: `yum install openssl`
    * Arch: `pacman -S openssl`

##### Task 2: Create your key

```bash
ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/myLabKey
```

>*Please note that we're creating a pair of files in your user home directory.
>`myLabKey` is the private key, and `myLabKey.pub` is the public key.  These
>files are typically stored in `~/.ssh`*

### Exercise 2: Create and connect to a Linux virtual machine

Scenario: In this exercise you will create a new Linux virtual machine by using
the [Azure Portal][] and use the key you generated to connect to it.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1. Create a new Linux virtual machine by using the [Azure Portal][]
1. Connect to the Linux virtual machine


#### Task 1: Create a new virtual machine

1. Using a web browser, navigate to the [Azure Portal][]

1. Click on the **+Create a resource** link.

1. Select Compute in the blade that comes up.

1. In the Compute blade select **See all**.

1. In the Filter text box, type **Ubuntu Server** and press **Enter**

1. In the list of results, click the latest recommended Ubuntu Server ("Ubuntu
   Server xx.xx LTS").

1. Check to ensure the deployment type is set to **Resource Manager**

1. Click **Create**.

1. On the Basics blade, specify the following and click **OK**.
    -  Name: **LabLinuxVM**
    -  VM disk type: **HDD**
    -  User name: **student**
    -  Authentication type: **SSH public key**
    -  SSH public key: paste the content of the public key file (Windows:
       `myPublicKey.key`, Mac/Linux: `myLabKey.pub`)
    -  Resource group: create a new resource group called **LabLinuxRG**
    -  Location: an Azure region closest to your physical location

1. On the Choose a size blade:
    - Click **"View all"**
    - Use your browser's find function to locate the **DS1_V2** size and click
      it to make it the selection.
    - Click the **Select** button on the bottom of the blade.

1. On the **Settings** blade, accept the default settings and click **OK**.

1. On the **Summary** blade, click **OK**

#### Task 2: Connect to the Linux virtual machine

**Note**: You need to wait until the new virtual machine has been provisioned.
This should take a couple of minutes. The [Azure Portal][] will automatically
display the new blade showing the settings of the new virtual machine.

Before you begin:

1. Navigate to the LabLinuxVM blade in the [Azure Portal][].
1. Click on the **Overview** section.
1. Note the *Public IP address* assigned to the VM

Skip to:

* [Windows Instructions](#using-putty)
* [Linux/Mac Instructions](#using-openssh)

##### Using Putty

1. Using a web browser, navigate to the [PuTTY Website][]

1. Download `putty.exe` to your computer and click **Run** when prompted.

1. In the **PuTTY Configuration** window, enter the public IP address of your linux VM.

1. In the **Category** section of the **PuTTY Configuration** window, expand
   the **Connection->SSH** nodes and click **Auth**.

1. Click **Browse** next to the **Private key file for authentication**
   text box.

1. In the **Select private key file** dialog box, navigate to the
   `C:\Users\<username>` directory (where `<username>` is your Windows user name),
   select `myPrivateKey_rsa.ppk` and click **Open**.

1. When prompted by the **PuTTY Security Alert**, click **Yes**.

1. In the **PuTTY** window, when prompted for the username, type in **student**
   and verify that you have successfully authenticated.

##### Using openSSH

1. Change the permissions on your private key.  
    ```bash
    bash chmod 600 ~/myLabKey
    ```

1. Login to the virtual machine. Replace `<ip-address>` with the public IP
   address of your VM. 

    ```bash
    ssh -i ~/myPublicKey student@<ip-address>
    ```

[PuTTY Website]: http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/download.html
[Azure Portal]: https://portal.azure.com
